The Project Gutenberg eBook of Food and Morals
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Food and Morals

Author: J. F. Clymer

Release date: September 5, 2016 [eBook #52992]
                Most recently updated: October 23, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Charlene Taylor, Bryan Ness, Les Galloway and
        the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
        http://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from scanned
        images of public domain material from the Google Books
        project.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOOD AND MORALS ***

                                 FOOD
                                  AND
                                MORALS;

                         A SERMON PREACHED BY

                          REV. J. F. CLYMER,
                                  IN
                THE FIRST METHODIST EPISCOPAL CHURCH AT
                           AUBURN, NEW YORK.

                    SIXTH EDITION: 110TH THOUSAND.

                               NEW YORK:
                          FOWLER & WELLS CO.,
                             775 BROADWAY.
                                 1888

  For a Sample number of the PHRENOLOGICAL JOURNAL, and our large list
  of works on Phrenology, Physiognomy, Health, Hygiene, Dietetics,
  Heredity, Children, &c., send your address on a Postal Card. F.& W.




     [_From_ REV. DR. DEEMS, _Church of the Strangers, New York_.]

MESSRS. FOWLER & WELLS:

_Gentlemen_:—I have read with great interest a sermon by Rev. Mr.
Clymer, of Auburn, on “The Relation of Food to Morals,” as it appeared
in the Auburn _Daily Advertiser_ of June 20th, 1880. Certainly
everything stands related to morals; and all men, women, and children
should be made to see and feel this.

I suppose I am considered an old-fashioned preacher. I believe in
“original sin,” and I believe in a great deal of sin that is not
original. I believe that every man is so corrupt that he can never be
made pure without supernatural influence; and I believe that he must
take advantage, at the same time, of all the natural helps. Even the
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ cannot make the saint who is in the
flesh, feel alert and happy, so long as he has any serious obstruction
of the biliary duct. When I was a younger pastor in a Southern city, I
was called by a mother to see her daughter, a girl of eighteen, who was
in a dreadful way, inconsolably laboring under the oppressive feeling
that there was no mercy for her. I prescribed for her torpid liver as
my knowledge of the healing art enabled me to do, promising to call
again soon. When I did call, the young lady was relieved, and I was
able to secure her attention to the comfortable truths of our most
holy faith. It is first the natural, and then the spiritual; St. Paul,
1 Cor. xv. 46: “Howbeit that was not first which is spiritual, but
that which is natural; and afterward that which is spiritual.” We must
always feel our dependence on the spirit of God for our regeneration
and sanctification, but not in such a way as to make fools of us. The
man whose faith in the supernatural makes him depreciate the natural,
has no more sense than he whose faith in the natural utterly excludes
super-nature.

I think you would do a good work to issue Mr. Clymer’s discourse as one
of a series of tracts proclaiming the gospel of hygiene. Will you not
do it?

  With kindest regards, yours truly,
  CHARLES F. DEEMS.

  NEW YORK, February 1, 1881.

                              ――――――――――

  REV. DR. DEEMS:

_Dear Sir_: Yours of February 1 received, and contents noted. Thanks
for your suggestion. Yes; we will do it. We will publish Mr. Clymer’s
sermon in so cheap a pamphlet form that we can give it an almost
universal circulation.

We do this because we believe with you most fully in the gospel of
hygiene.

  Yours very truly,
  FOWLER & WELLS.




                      RELATION OF FOOD TO MORALS.

                         A SERMON PREACHED BY
                          REV. J. F. CLYMER,

      IN THE FIRST METHODIST EPISCOPAL CHURCH, AUBURN, NEW YORK,
                      ON SUNDAY, JUNE 20TH, 1880.

 “If a man have a stubborn and rebellious son, which will not obey the
 voice of his father or the voice of his mother, and that when they
 have chastened him, will not hearken unto them, then shall his father
 and his mother lay hold on him, and bring him out unto the elders of
 his city, and unto the gates of his place; and they shall say unto the
 elders of his city: _This our son is stubborn and rebellious; he will
 not obey our voice; he is a glutton and a drunkard._”—DEUT. xxi. 18-20.


We have had much teaching that has left the impression on our minds
that the soul is the _only_ source and seat of all the vice in human
life. Because it is written “The imaginations of the thoughts of the
natural heart, are only evil continually,” total depravity has been
fixed on the spirit nature of man; that is, all the bad or immoral
elements entering into human life have been attributed to the innate
or inborn ugliness of the soul. Accepting the Scriptural truth that
“the soul that sinneth, it shall die,” we have come to think that sin
has its _center_, _seat_, _source and circumference_ in the soul, or
the immaterial nature of man. Hence we readily admit the fact that
influences, good or bad, may pass over from the soul to the body, but
we do not so readily admit that _other_ fact, equally true, that
influence good or bad may go over from the _body_ to the soul. The road
over which vicious thoughts and lustful imaginations pass from the soul
to the body is the highway over which unbridled appetites, unrestrained
passions and unsubdued lusts in the body may go to the soul, goading
it to the wildest conceptions of vice and lecherous imaginations. The
warm rays of the sun may gender rottenness in the muddy pool; so also
will the effluvia from the pool poison the sunlight near it. The soul
by its vicious thoughts and imaginations will entail an immoral tone on
the body; so also will the body react on the soul, by its appetites,
passions and propensities, increasing the viciousness of the soul by
pushing it to courses of vice not directly and immediately its own. In
our text is found an illustration of this thought. A father and mother
bring their stubborn and rebellious son to the elders of the Jewish
church. They assign, as the cause of his stubbornness and rebellion,
gluttony and drunkenness, than which there are no vices that demoralize
the body more, or goad the soul to greater crimes. Hear it:

“This our son is stubborn and rebellious, he will not obey our voice,
he is a glutton and a drunkard.” That is, bad conditions of the physical
nature, wrought by gluttony and drunkenness, have made him stubborn and
rebellious. It will not help the case to say that his stubbornness and
rebellion caused his gluttony and drunkenness, for if they did, then
his soul must act on the body. His morals must influence his manners,
and therefore his manners must reflect on his morals; they must
interact, which is just the point we make; that his appetite and lust
fire the temperament or disposition, and a fiery disposition provokes
appetite and lust to wilder indulgences.

A remarkable fact, in this day of advanced science and revelation, is
that Christians and moralists in their work of reform have paid so
little attention to the influence of the body on the soul. Jesus Christ
more than any other teacher or reformer recognized the demoralizing
and debasing influence of bad bodily conditions. Hence he almost
always healed maladies of the body before he entered his principles
upon the soul. It is true that his many miracles on the bodies of men
were primarily intended to reveal his divinity; yet divinity in its
manifestations always runs over the whole line of the natural before
passing into the supernatural; therefore Christ’s miracles on the
bodies of men had a sanitary side to them. The man with the leprosy was
in the poorest condition bodily to hear favorably any talk about moral
sweetness; hence Christ healed his diseased body, in connection with
his moral teachings. His example with the blind and hungry and deaf in
this respect ought not to go for nothing with those of us who seek to
save men in our day. Philanthropists and Christians for the most part
have overlooked the power of a debased body on the soul. They forget
that Paul likens a body that has sinful habitudes to a thing of death,
as compared with the soul that seeks to live the new life in Christ
Jesus. Therefore good men have labored to create in themselves and
those whom they seek to reform, certain emotional conditions of the
spirit, by a tenacious adherence to creeds, or the patient performance
of a set round of religious duties, and all this regardless of bad
physical conditions begotten by bad habits of eating and drinking.
While they have been struggling to bring their own souls and the souls
of others into holy attitudes, all the basilar forces of the body have
run riot within, and perhaps beyond, the pale of human customs and
human laws. If you want to empty a boiler of steam, it will not help
you much by lifting the safety valve if you still keep water in the
boiler and fire in the furnace. Prayer, Bible reading and Psalm singing
will not help a man much to get rid of his sins, if he keeps up a set
of bodily habits which fire the body and inflame the soul to continue
its sinning. That you may see the connection more clearly between
vice and victuals, let me show you how food may damage our bodies and
demoralize our souls.

I am fully aware of the difficulties I encounter in entering this
thought on your minds. Because religion has been considered as having
little or nothing to do with the body, I shall encounter the settled
opinions of good men to this effect. Because our popular methods of
eating have the sanction of custom and the defense of long established
habits, I may not criticise them without losing the favor of those who
are content with things as they are. Because I shall call in question
many indulgences of appetite hitherto considered sinless, I shall run
the risk of being called a fanatic or fool. Because I shall preach the
New Testament doctrine of self-denial many will say this is a hard
saying—“who can bear it?” But with the hope that I may unfold to you a
glorious realm of liberty from the bondage of bodily propensities, I
cheerfully do my duty and leave the consequences for God to look after.

Very few of us are aware of the great physical demoralization and
spiritual wickedness, brought on us and our children, by bad habits of
eating, as to the kind of food, the mode of its preparation, and the
manner and times of taking it. We refuse to think of our indulgences
of appetite as the cause of our physical ailments and premature death,
and much less will we allow ourselves to believe that these indulgences
have anything to do with forming our morals or shaping our characters
or determining our eternal destiny.

And yet I aver, without the fear of successful refutation, that
three-fourths of all our bodily ailments or diseases, and many of our
immoral acts, are the legitimate results of improper dietetic habits.
If these habits do not effect us directly, they do so indirectly by
lowering the tone of the whole system, physical and moral, causing us
to break down prematurely into some disease or deviltry, under the
pressure of legitimate toil or immoral provocation. How is it possible
to account for the death of one half the human family before five years
of age, unless we trace it to the violation of physical laws in some
way connected with the eating habits alike of parent and child? Many
children enter the world with such a low state of inherited physical
vitality, and so little moral tone, that they are unable to resist
the attacks of bodily disease or throw it off when on them, and much
less able to throw off moral disease and rise above their immoral
heritage if spared to pass through childhood to years of maturity. Such
children not only carry in their little bodies the physical weaknesses
of their parents, but also the specific immoral tendencies found in
the conditions of their parentage. And more than this, should their
endowment of vitality be sufficient to carry them over the death line
for infants, they are subject to such unnatural relations to dress and
diet that it becomes a natural impossibility for them to live. In this
way many children die prematurely, not by the arbitrary edict of God,
but by the violation of law. And if God should save their lives by
special suspension of his laws, more damage would be done to the moral
harmony of the universe than to let them die. I know it is a common
custom to ascribe all sickness and death to the direct and arbitrary
action of Divine Providence. That is, if one overeats, or eats
innutritious food, or at improper times, making himself sickly, so that
he becomes an easy prey to disease, and dies suddenly or at the noon
tide of life, all the good people say—“What a strange Providence!” As
if God had everything to do with such a death, and the deceased had
little or nothing to do with it. I incline to the opinion that Divine
Providence has little or nothing to do with such deaths only in so
far as Divine Providence is in the laws of life violated. The primary
cause of all premature deaths is violated law. God does not arbitrarily
kill anybody. Most of those who die in infancy or in early life, come
to death by the violation of God’s laws written in their bodies. If
these laws were obeyed in us and in our ancestry, most of us ought to
live beyond three score years and ten, and drop from this life into
the other in a ripe, mellow old age, just as ripe fruit drops from its
bough in autumn time. But you ask where is God in the many untimely
deaths that occur? I answer He is present in his great hearted goodness
to help the dying to an eternal victory over death, if they will only
let Him. He is present to bind up the hearts that are breaking with
sorrow for the departed, and to make a sudden, untimely, and needless
death a monument of warning to those still living, thus making the
wrath of man to praise Him. If therefore our children die in infancy,
because we have entailed on them feeble bodies by our violation of law,
God does not kill them, but they die through violated law, and he in
His goodness takes the little ones to His bosom, the seat and source of
all law. Let us not then charge our sorrows to the willful enactment
of our Heavenly Father. He taketh no pleasure in the death of him that
dieth. When he gives life to us, He intends that we shall keep it as
long as possible.

Having given us life, all the forces of His boundless nature are
engaged to maintain it in us until He is ready to harvest us as the
farmer does the ripened grain. The God of nature and the God of grace
are not in antagonism. “The one God is in all and over all.” A kingdom
divided against itself cannot stand. If, therefore, we die this side
of three score years and ten—seventy years—we die untimely. It is high
time that good men were awake to this fact, and ceased charging over
to Divine Providence what legitimately belongs to ourselves. “Jesus
Christ came to destroy him that hath the power of death, that is the
devil;” and when the philosophy of Jesus is wrought up into human lives
by obedience to physical laws, the power of disease and death over
our bodies will be very much broken. The victory over death can be so
far achieved by men in the body that they need not die until their
minds and hearts have received all the development in this world that
infinite love ordains. That is, men may so baffle the monster of death
by obedience to law as to keep him at bay until their souls have taken
on such Christly ripeness that they shall burst and break their bodies,
as the ripening chestnuts break their burrs under the frosts of autumn.
We have, therefore, no right to ascribe to supernatural agency any
phenomena which can be explained on natural principles. Disobedience
to law brings penalties. There is nothing that men need to see more in
their efforts at reform than the connection between their sufferings
and their disobedience. Now, disobedience to the laws of life brings
the penalties, sickness and premature death. There is no field where
our disobedience manifests itself more frequently and with so little
thought of consequences, as in our false and unnatural habits of eating
and drinking, which damage the body and demoralize the soul.

“The Blood is the Life.” This is the declaration alike of revelation and
of science. Evolutionary processes may induce a variation in the form
or number of the blood corpuscles, but they can not set aside the law
that the building and rebuilding of all the organs involved in bodily
or mental acts comes from the blood alone. The physical, mental and
moral natures are so intimately connected that that which affects one,
affects the others. So that a man’s mental and moral nature, as well
as his physical, can very largely be determined by the quality of his
blood. Now it is a physiological fact that our blood is made out of
the food we eat. That food which enters the mouth and is assimilated,
makes blood. By the marvelous processes of digestion and assimilation
our food is transformed into blood; and the blood passing through the
veins and arteries repairs the waste tissues and forms new ones, thus
building up our bodies and sustaining life. It follows then that our
bodies are made of the food we eat. Evidently it was the design of
our Creator that the prime object of eating should be the building up
of tissue—muscles, bones and brains. That this may be a pleasure to
us, He has associated with eating the delights of appetite. But most
of us have so far perverted the divine order as to make the pleasures
of appetite the chief object of eating. “Give us something _good_ to
eat,” is the great cry of humanity, and the goodness of food is gauged
by the sensations of the palate and not by the law of nutrition. Most
of us determine the goodness of our food by the amount of sensual
delight it imparts to the palate, no matter how much damage it may
do beyond to the delicate and intricate structure of the stomach and
viscera. Hence a vast amount of food enters the mouth that makes bad
blood, blood that in itself is corrupt, and carries poisonous particles
to every organ in the system, putting us in splendid condition to be
easily provoked to some outburst of anger, passion or revenge. My
hearers, there is a sure and vital connection between bad blood and
bad morals. Blood always tells in morals as well as in muscles. Blood
has power throughout the whole realm of life, whether it be in a human
body, in society, or in the body of a horse on the racecourse.

You ask, what kind of food makes bad blood? I answer, very much of the
flesh of animals, that forms the staple diet of most of us. Sty-fed
pigs and stall-fed oxen are fattened under the most unlawful and
unhealthful conditions possible; shut up in the dark, cut off from
exercise, the fat deposited on their bodies is made up of the waste
matter that the life-forces of the animal have been unable to expel.
This waste fatty matter, surcharged with unexpelled excretions, is
liable to induce disease in all who consume it. It has established
tuberculosis in captive lions, and in cats and dogs, and in other
carnivora; and it were folly to assume that mankind, feeding upon
such poisonous food, should wholly escape. Even in the living animal
this effete unexpelled poisonous waste breeds vermin, such as have
been found in pork, which cannot be destroyed by ordinary cooking or
by the process of digestion, and hence live and generate in the human
body, producing disease and death. I am not now making a plea for the
absolute disuse of animal food, but against the bad quality of very
much of it, and also against the inordinate use of that which may be
good in quality. A certain amount of animal food is useful for our
nourishment, especially in winter time, because of its heat producing
qualities. But meat every day, and at every meal, is in no way
necessary for the proper sustenance of the human system.

The use of large quantities of animal food, however free from
disease-germs, as a _staple_ article of diet makes the blood gross,
coarse and corrupt, filling the body with scrofulous elements, sending
poison to every part of the system, causing it to break out in running
sores, salt-rheum, tetter and the like, producing an inordinate
appetite, throwing every organ of the body into frictional relations
to every other organ. It is a matter of every-day surprise to me
that any human being will consent to eat the flesh of pigs. Consider
their uncleanness, their selfish, greedy habits, the vast amount of
corruption that enters into their bodies, their want of exercise,
their impure breathing, their lack of sudorific glands or emunctories,
through which effete tissues and morbid accumulations may be expelled;
and think, when you eat pork, of the train of horrid elements which
enter into your body. And your body thus debased by a low order of
animal flesh, the effect must be to make you take on the disposition
and tendencies of the hog. God’s bill of fare in the eleventh chapter
of Leviticus excluded from the tables of the Jews the hog and all water
animals except those that had fins and scales. This bill of fare was
given to the Jews not only for the preservation of their health, but,
as God’s great purpose was moral reform, He had an eye single to their
moral condition in the matter of their eating. Does any one doubt that
the unhealthy, ugly, and vicious elements that make up the flesh of
most of the animals we eat, enter our blood, and in that way affect the
disposition or carriage of the soul? I am confident, if there was less
demand for animal food the quality would be very much better. Animals
would not be subject to false and unhealthy generation, and false and
hasty methods of growth. They would come up more in keeping with the
laws of their nature, and come to us with more healthy and better
qualities. As for the hog, if man would not domesticate him, he could
not propagate his species. He would become extinct just like the lion,
leopard, and hyena, under the march of civilization. As the blessings
of civilized life reach us, you notice the carnivorous or flesh-eating
animals become extinct. So it seems to me that with the developments of
civilization there ought to be such moral refinements in human beings
that they would grow away from their carnivorous tendencies, and eat
such food as tends to develop the mental and moral faculties, and not
the animal propensities. Among animals you find that those that live on
the flesh of other animals are the most vicious and destructive, such
as the lion, leopard, and hyena. Those animals that live on the grains
and the higher order of foods are the best, most beautiful, and most
useful, such as the horse and cow. If this law obtains among animals,
why not among men? Beyond a doubt it does. If you want proof of this,
study the character and lives of those who live largely on animal food,
and you will find them very animal-like in all their relations—restive,
impatient, passionate, ugly in their ways, fiery in their disposition,
easily provoked, readily put out of humor. And if you could look into
their private lives you would find all their baser qualities having the
fullest sway, stopping, it may be, inside the fence of human laws and
customs, but seldom considering the claims of a higher and divine law.
I charge, then, very much of our household misery, domestic woe, and
connubial wretchedness, to unrestrained lust begotten in the body by
the inordinate use of animal food.

We forget, my hearers, that the great law of nature, “Like produces
like,” is universal. “Every seed after its kind is the law of all
creation.” There is no exception to this law. This principle obtains
not only in the production of life, but in the processes of its
development. If my position about the intimacy of soul and body is
true, then, if a man’s body is made up chiefly of flesh taken from
diseased animals, and his whole physical frame is saturated with the
irritating and exciting condiments of what is popularly called good
food, the whole bias of his bodily powers will be toward animalism.
All the impressions and impulses that the soul receives from such a
body are beastly and debasing. Like produces like in the formation of
physical tissue out of food, as well as in the generation of stock in
the stall. Hence I hold that very much of the wickedness of mankind
is the natural expression of physical beastliness rather than the
outflow of innate viciousness. A body made up largely of all manner of
nerve-goading, passion-producing, anger-generating elements, such as
are found in the gross animal dishes with their stimulating adjuncts,
just as surely drives the soul to sin as a tempest drives a feather
before it.

As modern research has proved that bad or imperfect food when
digested surely makes bad or imperfect blood, incapable of performing
its appointed work of upbuilding and of reparation, so has science
demonstrated that perfect food is one of the most potent among
remedies for the relief of many diseased conditions. Since the blood
is the life, and since blood is merely food emulsified, mingled with
certain digestive fluids and colored by the oxygen with which it is
brought in contact in the lungs—it is easy to understand how perfect
food may create perfect blood, which shall presently supplant that
which is feeble, that which is lacking in waste-repairing power, that
which fails to give strength to the muscles or vigor to the brain,
and may thus become the most effective medicine. A perusal of recent
professional medical literature evinces the great stress which is now
laid upon dietetics in the treatment of all diseases. The approach to
this high altitude has been gradual, but sure. At first foods were made
the vehicles for drugs; and cod-liver oil and malt-extracts, which are
only concentrated foods of the hydro-carbon varieties, were loaded with
lime and iron and strychnine and phosphorous and scores of other drugs.
But perfect results were secured by the use of these foods without
the drug additions, and so the foods were at last given the credit
which all along belonged to them. And so it has come to pass that with
advanced medical men, in a vast majority of cases of sickness, the
support of the life-powers by proper nutrients is the foremost thought,
the best food proving to be the best medicine.

The kind of food a man eats, and the time and manner of his eating it,
are not merely a question of medicine, but one of the first questions
of morals. The effects of food on the passions and feelings are thus
described by Prior:

    “Observe the various operations
    Of food and drink in several nations;
    Was ever Tartar fierce and cruel
    Upon the strength of water gruel?
    But who shall stand his rage and force
    When first he rides, then eats, his horse?
    Salads and eggs and lighter fare,
    Tune the Italian spark’s guitar;
    And if I take Don Confrere right,
    Pudding and beef make Britons fight.”


If, therefore, our meat has something to do with our morals, or if our
food in some way affects our faith, it seems to me that many of our
efforts at moral reform ought to be preceded by instruction in hygiene.
In other words, efforts to make a man genuinely devotional ought to be
prefaced by efforts to correct bad dietetic habits. A father, by prayer
and precept and flogging, had done his best to reform his boy, whose
staple diet was meat and sausage and pie and cake at his meals, with
lunch between. The family physician said to the father, “If you will
put a leech back of each of your boy’s ears once a week for a month,
you will do more to reform him than your preaching and pounding will do
in a year.” The father asked for the philosophy of this prescription.
“Why,” said the doctor, “your boy has bad blood, and too much of it;
he must behave badly or he would burst.” “Then,” said the father,
“I’ll change his diet from beef and pie to hominy and milk.” In three
months thereafter a better boy for his age could not be found in the
neighborhood. The acrid, biting, evil blood had not become food for
leeches, but it had done its wicked work and passed away, and a cooler,
blander, purer, safer blood had been supplied from sweeter, gentler
food sources.

In your use of animal food be very particular as to quality and
quantity. Lamb and mutton are considered the most healthy by the
authorities. Avoid as you would contagion the use of pork, unless you
raise it yourselves, and feed it with good grain, and not the refuse
of the house or barn, and keep the animals as clean as you do your pet
dogs. Never fry your meat with hogs’ lard, but stew, bake, boil, or
broil it. Use hogs’ lard in no form for cooking. Most of it is said to
be reeking with scrofulous elements. Displace it in _all_ your cooking
by milk or butter. If you want to aid and not hinder the growth of your
soul Godward, if you desire to have pure thoughts and a pure heart and
a pure life, see that you make your blood out of pure food, or you
will find that your soul will have an enemy within the castle of its
body more treacherous and deadly than any of its enemies without.

There is another popular article of food among us, which has a vital
connection with bodily disorders and bad exhibition of character. Good
in proper quantities and in its sphere, when made the largest and chief
article of diet, for every meal, the one kind of food upon which we
depend most for building up the wastes of our bodies, it indirectly
does great damage. I refer to the ordinary fine flour bread made out of
bolted wheat meal.

It is proper to remember that the white flour from which our bread
is chiefly made, and which is deemed the staff of life, is a purely
artificial product—a selection from that perfect food combination
which exists in wheat. A competent food chemist has compared the
regular milling processes to one by which the fat part of an ox should
be saved for food, and the lean part—the albuminous or nitrogenous
portion—discarded and given to the dogs. The comparison is well based,
since the starch of wheat, which is valued because of its whiteness,
is a carbo-hydrate, chemically allied to the fat of meat; while the
dark nutriment of wheat, which, because of its color, is discarded with
the bran with which it is found in contact in nature, is a vegetable
nitrogenous albumen, rich in mineral elements, and almost identical,
chemically, with the lean or muscular tissue of beef.

The process of bolting or refining takes from the wheat most of the
phosphates and nitrates, the elements that are chiefly required for
making nerves, muscles, bones, and brains. The phosphates and nitrates
being removed by bolting, very little remains in the flour except
the starchy carbonates, the heat and fat producing elements. The use
of fine flour bread as a staple article of food introduces too much
heat and fat-producing elements into the system, and where there is
too much carbon or heating substance, it tends rather to provoke the
system to unnatural and abnormal action, and instead of serving as an
element to warm the body, its tendency is to burn or consume, heating
and irritating all the organs, getting one into that state which is
popularly known as “hot-blooded.” The fine white flour ordinarily
used has two-thirds of the nitrogenous and mineral nutriment that God
put in the wheat taken out. Unless these deficiencies are made up by
some other foods, the exclusive use of fine flour bread will leave
the nerves and bones poorly nourished, producing in some systems
nervousness, dyspepsia, and all the physical ills that follow these
diseases, together with impatience, fretfulness, and irritability. God
intended that all the nutritive properties He put in the wheat should
stay in it for purposes of symmetrical nourishment. Fine flour bread
may be used for purposes of producing heat in the system, but it does
not feed hungry nerves or starving bones.

One reason why children fed chiefly on white bread feel hungry nearly
all the time, and demand so much food between meals, is found in the
fact that their bodies are insufficiently nourished. Their bones
and nerves not receiving the nitrates and phosphates they need, are
suffering from hunger.

When children are fed with food that thoroughly nourishes their whole
system, they will seldom desire to eat between meals and thus retard
the process of digestion and lay the foundation for dyspepsia and all
its kindred evils.

Flour made of all the nutriment of pure white wheat, unbolted, yet
without the shell or husk or bran, contains all the elements necessary
for the nourishment of the body. The flour called Graham flour rarely
contains these elements. There is a great deal of bogus stuff in the
market, which has brought the genuine article into disrepute, and made
many thoughtful people disgusted with everything in that line. Very
much that is called Graham flour is made up of a mixture of fine bolted
flour, and the woody fibre of the wheat, which has no nutriment in it
at all. This wretched fabrication has tended to make all whole wheat
products unpopular. The woody bran is worse than worthless as food,
or to mix with food. You might as well eat the shells of nuts, or the
husks of corn, or the skins of potatoes, as the silex coats of wheat.
To overload the alimentary canal with such foreign indigestible matter
has no other tendency but to weaken and debilitate it. Very few millers
trouble themselves to make a perfect whole wheat flour. I know but one
establishment in the world where wheat and other grains are treated
precisely as they should be, with all the harmful part removed and the
rest made digestible by harmless methods, and that is the Health Food
Company of New York.[1]

[1] See Appendix, page 30.

Bread leavened, or unleavened, made out of what is called the Cold
Blast Whole Wheat Flour, makes more muscle and furnishes more food for
the nerves than any other article of food given to man except the pure
gluten of wheat. I am not now advocating the views of the extremists,
the Grahamites, neither do I counsel the disuse of fine flour bread.
This latter should be used in connection with unbolted flour, but
should not be relied on to furnish you with all the nutritious elements
that your bodies need. There is a golden mean between the extremes
of vegetarianism and exclusive flesh diet which the common sense of
thoughtful people will find. During the warm season a diet made up
chiefly of fruits, grains, and vegetables will be most healthful
for body and soul. Instead of the scrofula-breeding pork or ham for
breakfast, use some one of the great variety of grains, especially
oat-meal, than which there are few better foods for growing children
and hard working adults. Instead of fried cakes, rich pastry, and
candies, use fruit, of which there is an abundant variety, ten-fold
more nourishing than pies or cakes, and very cleansing to the blood.
Let brown bread, Johnnie-cake, and corn-meal pudding supplant fine
wheat bread as much as possible. Eat your meals regularly and slowly,
eating nothing between them. Eat sparingly of meat at mid-day, and let
it be good fresh beef, mutton, or fish, well cooked. Let the evening
meal be taken not later than six o’clock. Discard tea and coffee, and
make your own coffee with browned crusts of bread, or burned whole
wheat.[2] Follow these suggestions and you will find very many of the
ills of your body departing and very many of the troubles you have in
behaving yourselves, vanishing.

[2] The Health Food Company prepare a “Cereal Coffee” from Wheat Gluten
and Barley, which not only makes a delicious beverage, but tends
to greatly strengthen both body and brain. Those who would release
themselves from the dangerous practice of tea-drinking, and the less
injurious but still objectionable use of the commercial coffees, will
do well to try this nutrient beverage.

Again, we derange our bodies and demoralize our souls by eating too
much. The great end of life with many of us is to eat. The American
dining-room has become, for the most part, a place for the indulgence
of animalism, and not for the development of the affections or social
qualities. A distinguished American physician said: “I am sixty-six
years old, and I have eaten enough food to answer my wants for 100
years, and yet I am what most people call a small eater.” The popular
habit of using, inordinately, appetizers in the shape of the ordinary
table condiments, begets a false and unnatural appetite. The time comes
when honest food palls upon the depraved senses. The pampered, jaded
appetite no longer finds satisfaction in simple food-flavors; the
palate must be prompted with pungent things. The cook, who is never a
physiologist, responds to the demand for spurs to appetite, and finds
them in mixtures of spices and peppers and mustards and acids and
essential oils and chemicals, and multitudes of non-food substances.
With these, and various biting alcohols, the delicate lining of the
stomach is inflamed, inducing a desire for food which passes for what
it is not, namely, honest appetite. The palate demands more food than
the stomach can digest or the system assimilate. Poor nature, anxious
to do the best she can, adapts herself to the unnatural situation,
and forces all the other organs to do the same; and thus we become
accustomed to over-eating and do not know it.

That all who accustom themselves to a stimulating diet, to spices and
wines and other irritating things, consume too much food, cannot, I
think, be gainsayed. The amount and kind of food needed depends upon
the individual habits and the kind of waste to be supplied. A wholly
idle man should thrive well on cucumbers and water-melons, which are
chiefly water; while the hard-working hod-carrier would demand several
pounds of solid carbon and nitrogen daily. It is the sedentary, the
well-to-do, the man of leisure, who suffers most from over-eating; and
it behooves him to carefully avoid all goads and spurs to appetite.
With the simplest flavors he is nearly certain to over-eat and thus to
suffer. With an appetite stimulated and induced, without corresponding
out-door labor to create a genuine need and demand for it, digestive
failure and assimilative bankruptcy is only a question of time.

The stomach, overloaded, performs its work imperfectly, and thus
imposes on all the organs an extra amount of work, which breaks them
down prematurely, causing diseases of every kind, such as nervous
headache, sick headache, rush of blood to the head, apoplexy, sore
eyes, deafness, erysipelas, neuralgia of the face, decayed teeth,
catarrh, bronchitis, asthma, nausea, common colic, congestion of the
liver, and a host of other diseases too unpleasant to mention. In some
cases there is a disposition of too much fatty matter in the system;
and many people suppose that fatness is a sign of healthfulness, which
is false. No one needs any more fat on his body than is essential to
form cushions for his tendons and muscles; if too much, there is a
depletion of strength.

The crowded and overloaded condition of the system makes the body take
on very many false manifestations. The irritation produced in an
overcharged system manifests itself in different forms in different
individuals. In some it produces nervousness, making them rack the
flesh off their bones and keeping them poor; and in others it produces
sluggishness, retaining defunct matter in the system, making them
corpulent. As I have said, our highly-seasoned foods create morbid and
abnormal appetites.

As a consequence we eat too much and too often, the system being borne
down by overwork in its digestive department, there comes a demand for
stimulating drinks and medicines to take off the depression and to keep
up tone; and to make ourselves feel good, after having made ourselves
feel bad, by improper eating, some of us resort to tea and coffee, and
others to alcohol, and then the excitement produced demands a sedative,
and some of us smoke and others chew a poisonous weed called tobacco.
Thus the poor body, subject to these revulsions of unnatural action in
overwork and stimulation and sedation, is goaded to abnormities and
unnatural action, sending up to the soul no other influences but those
which drive it to moral madness and vicious deeds.

Now, vice is a morbid exhibition of the will. The will is represented
through the physical organ, the brain, and the brain is straightway
affected by the condition of the body and the state of the blood. The
will is that power of the mind by which we put forth volitions and
perform actions. If the pressure of bad blood is on the brain, that
same pressure is on the will; hence a sick man or a diseased man will
do a great many bad things through the power of bad blood on the will.
Vice, then, is both the result and cause of physical derangement.
Hence that vice of vices, drunkenness.

Drunkenness may be caused by bad physical conditions, brought about
by bad habits of eating. Would it not be well for us to look into
bad table habits for one of the reasons why so many of our young men
become drunkards? May there not be some cause working in the flesh
of our youths, driving them to intemperance? May it not be possible
that kind fathers and mothers for years have been filling up the awful
gap of 40,000 dead drunkards annually by feeding their children upon
stimulating, highly-seasoned, innutritious foods? There is no doubt
in my mind that every man is a glutton before he is a drunkard. If
nature’s laws are violated, a man’s sensations will be all abnormal,
and the mainsprings of his life will be befouled, and the result
will be irregular and vicious expressions of all the appetites, both
for food and drink. I am, therefore, confident that the widespread
appetite for intoxicating liquors is largely due to the false relations
that the American people hold to their food. We cannot hope much
from moral suasion and legal enactments so long as we overlook the
physical condition of the drunkard. If you would cure disease or vice
effectually, you must shut off that which nourishes them, instead of
putting all your force in efforts to antidote them. “Let the wicked
forsake his way,” and then turn unto the Lord, and he will have mercy
on him, and to our God, and he will abundantly pardon him. There are
200,000 drunkards in the United States, 40,000 of whom go annually to
premature graves. There are 20,000 prostitutes, whose average life
in their profession is four years. Do you believe this vast army of
immortals go willingly to ruin? There are causes lying back of mere
perversities of soul in the common every-day dietetic habits of these
forlorn ones.

Eating and drinking are always associated with the bar and brothel,
and if you will take notice, the eating is always of that kind of
food which goes straight for the animal nature, and wakes up in a man
everything that is beastly.

The whole tendency of the food furnished at the popular bar-room
restaurant is to stir the baser elements in humanity and keep up the
demand for alcoholic stimulants. No wonder the drinking saloons can
afford to give what they call a “free lunch.” Care is taken to furnish
such food as fires the appetite for strong drink, and the rum-seller
gets his pay for his “free lunch” through the sale of the whisky that
must inevitably follow it. Those who, living on highly stimulating
foods, but do not drink strong drinks, will find that the bias of their
bodily powers, instead of being toward mental and spiritual spheres,
will be toward animal indulgences, dragging the mind and soul into
servitude to the flesh, and where there are any moral aspirations,
making the conflict between the higher and lower nature so intense that
a vast amount of moral force is wasted in self-conflict that ought to
go into the world’s redemptive agencies for saving the lost.

I am confident that the American habit of eating sumptuous and late
suppers, whether at our homes or church fairs or festivals, is damaging
the physical, mental, and moral health of our nation more than any
other one thing of its kind; more damaging, because it has the
appearance of innocency, and the sanction of our fathers and mothers
and some of our pastors.

Furthermore, the habit of eating hurriedly, or hastily, is preying
upon the vital and moral forces of many of us. A meal eaten hastily or
nervously, under the pressure of intense mental activity or nervous
tension, or great weariness, begins its work of nutrition under the
greatest possible disadvantage. All our meals should be eaten calmly
and deliberately, so as to thoroughly masticate the food, and not
impose on the stomach and viscera the legitimate work of the teeth.
In the interest of health to soul as well as body I enter an earnest
plea for more time for eating, and especially at noon, when most hard
working people take their principal meal. Clerks, business men, and
school teachers, mechanics, laborers, and our children who attend the
public schools, need more time at noon to properly dispose of the chief
meal of the day. No better investment could be made to secure the best
possible physical, intellectual, financial, and moral returns than for
all classes of people to take two hours at mid-day for resting and
eating dinner. Selfish greed demands otherwise, and makes a show of
gain; but the loss is sure to come in due time to all parties concerned.

My friends, when will we fast-living, fast-eating, fast-working, and
fast-dying Americans learn the great lesson, that life is a unit,
that the Divine Trinity in us, namely, the physical, intellectual,
and spiritual, is one life, with different phases of expression; and
whatever mars one mars the whole, and whatever builds up one most
surely builds up the others? All our powers are many members in one
body, with an inter-dependence which is eternal. Slight your body,
and you smite your soul and enervate the mind. Corrupt the mind, and
you debase both body and soul. When will those who profess to be God’s
children by the adoption of the Holy Ghost, catch the Spirit of His
great Apostle Paul, who, more than any other sacred writer, maintained
the sanctity of the human body and its subservience to the mind and
soul. Hear him: “I beseech you, brethren, by the mercies of God that
ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God,
which is your reasonable service, and be not conformed to this world,
but be ye transformed by the renewing of your minds, that ye may prove
what is that good and acceptable and perfect will of God.” I admit the
power of the Holy Ghost in the work of regeneration, but is there not
something for us to do, in keeping our bodies under, “lest we become
cast-aways?” I do not say that _all_ human evils and ills have their
primary origin in physical habits, but I do say that the great mass
of impulsions from the excited, inflamed, over-stimulated body toward
the soul, are in the interests of sin. The economy of salvation orders
otherwise. By the Gospel the body may become the temple of the Holy
Ghost. By the law of self-denial of the New Testament, our bodies, with
all their fiery elements, may be made an inspiration to our souls.
It is not the purpose of God that a life-time warfare shall be kept
up between the body and the soul. There ought to come to every true
Christian a day of final victory over his bodily powers, in which they
will cease their rebellion, and come into the sweetest union with the
soul in its great work of developing a likeness to Christ.

Why are we called upon to present the body a living sacrifice to God,
if its powers are not to be sanctified to holy purposes? Why should we
spend all our life waiting for the adoption of our whole nature, to
wit, the redemption of the body, as well as the soul.

Our fondest dreams for the progress of humanity must be based in a
newly created body by strict obedience to the laws of God, written on
every fibre, tissue, muscle, and bone. We cannot develop the human
brain and heart to the possibilities that God has put in them, while
they are the tenants of bodies the laws of which are violated in the
commonest habits of every-day life.

Regeneration does a mighty work for us; but generation has also much
to do with our highest and best development. The sins of the fathers
must cease, so that the sons may be spared their terrible visitations;
the accumulated virtues of parents must roll over on their children in
purer, stronger, and better bodies until by a blessed economy the whole
race shall be exalted to heirship with Christ through loving obedience
to all the laws of physical as well as moral life.

Why may we not now, under the laws of redemption, begin to build a new
heaven and a new earth, new souls and new bodies. If our souls are
redeemed and renewed by obedience and faith, why not secure also the
redemption of our bodies? I know it is slow work to teach the subtle
but mighty elements of self-restraint. I know the flesh lusteth against
the spirit. Yet I thank God who giveth us the victory through our Lord
Jesus Christ.




                               APPENDIX.


In complying with the request of Messrs. Fowler & Wells for the
manuscript of this sermon for publication, I should fall far short of
my duty if I did not allude more particularly than seemed appropriate
in a Sabbath sermon, to the valuable work which is being done by the
Health Food Company, and to the great excellence of its products. If
these remarks were addressed to physicians, the simple mention of the
name of the company would suffice, because there are probably very
few medical men and women who are not aware of the good work of this
organization in the matter of providing perfect foods for invalids of
every type, as well as for such as are in health and are solicitous
thus to continue. The work of the company has, from the beginning,
been under the wise direction of a scientific head, himself an
original investigator, and having an ample acquaintance with all the
truths which have been evolved by modern scientific research. While
it is very important that physicians should know all that is to be
known concerning improved forms of diet, in order that their large
opportunities for conveying valuable information to the world may not
go unused, I deem it of even greater moment that the vast body of
intelligent readers and church-goers should be made aware of the fact
that in the matter of food and its preparation there are laws which
are not comprehended by ignorant cooks, which may not be violated with
impunity, the scope and importance of which are being more perfectly
understood from year to year, and which, in their practical application
by intelligence and skill, are capable of accomplishing a grand work in
the up-building and re-building of human bodies and brains. Especially
am I desirous that my brethren in the ministry—many of whom, I am
persuaded, suffer from unsupplied waste of brain and nerve power—should
more fully appreciate the fact that while waste of the grosser tissues
of the body may be supplied by common forms of food, such foods may
nearly or quite fail to supply or replenish the waste of the delicate
brain and nervous system; and should understand how the best foods for
the active brain-worker can be procured.

A dyspeptic myself, a member of a dyspeptic family, and observing
much of that kind of misery and weakness which arises from digestive
feebleness, I have been compelled to study the subject of food in its
relation to bodily and mental and moral well-being, during many years;
and it is not less a pleasure than a duty to say that an intimate
acquaintance with the researches of the Health Food Co. and its
products, has convinced me that this organization is the center and
source of the best information obtainable in any land, on the subject
of dietetics; that the food which it prepares from many substances,
especially from the cereal grains, are the best in the world; and that
all who seek to live wisely and well, all who are strong and would
continue so, all who are feeble and would fain be strong, all in whom
the spirit to lead noble and useful lives is willing, but in whom the
flesh, alas! is weak—owe it to themselves and to all whom they have
power to influence, to learn all that can be learned concerning the
great work of this company. In this brief Appendix it is not possible
to allude, even remotely, to all its investigations in the domain of
dietetics, nor to fully indicate the valuable results which it has
achieved. I shall be justified, however, in referring to a few of its
more prominent applications of scientific thought to the daily needs of
humanity.

It knew that the white commercial flour of wheat, by whatever “new
process,” or under whatever brand, was a robbed, impoverished food,
and that attached to the bran or husk—which is excluded as it should
be—there is a layer of nitrogeneous substance which goes to the cows
and horses. It deemed it a pity that human bodies and brains should
be deprived of just what it most needed for perfect support—this
wheat nitrogen, so rich in the useful minerals without which there is
no adequate up-building of every tissue. So it devised a method of
removing all the woody, branny, siliceous coats from the grain without
wasting one atom of the nutriment. Seeing that ordinary mill-stone
grinding tended to heat and impair the flour, it devised other and
better methods of pulverizing. To-day, as for years past, their whole
wheat flour is not a coarse, harsh, branny mixture, like what is called
“Graham,” but a perfect, natural, nourishing bread-food, with nothing
taken from it that is useful, and without the obnoxious addition of
grit from rapidly revolving millstones, or the woody fibre and silex
which form the protecting, innutritious shell. Thus the theories of
the value of bread from the entire wheat berry, advanced by Dr. John
C. Warren, of Boston, in 1825, and subsequently urged by Dr. Sylvester
Graham, were taken up by the head of the Health Food Company, sustained
in part and exploded in part, while the small residue of truth really
existing in the Grahamite philosophy, modified and improved by exact
experiments and by scientific methods, has at length been made of
real value to the human race instead of continuing to be a source
of possible, and often of positive injury, by virtue of the errors
originally attending it. The perfect, branless flour of the entire
grain is called the COLD BLAST WHOLE WHEAT FLOUR, and is, beyond
question, the most perfect bread-food in the world.

Again, chemistry long ago proved that the nitrogenous, albuminous
element of the great food staples (the cereal grains) known as GLUTEN,
was the chief source of muscular tissue in animals, whether obtained
from grasses, seeds, or other vegetable substances; that it could be
digested in a mixture of 1 part gastric juice and 10 parts water; that
it could be separated from its universal attendant, starch, by washing;
and that a kind of tasteless, insipid bread could then be made from
it, which was understood to be useful in a disease called diabetes.
Up to a few years ago these facts comprised pretty much all that the
scientific world knew about GLUTEN. It was known to exist; Koopman,
the German chemist, had shown it to be readily digestible; and it was
non-convertible into sugar, and therefore a safe food for those to whom
starch, or the sugar which results from digested starch, is little
less than poison. These slender facts were not sufficient to satisfy
the accurate investigator at the head of the Health Food Co. He deemed
it probable that this easily digested GLUTEN, this source of all the
tissues of the ox except the fatty ones, would be found to be of vast
value as a separate food for human beings, if while being practically
isolated from the starch and bran associates which nature provides,
it could still retain the pleasant grainy flavor of the cereal which
supplies it. He began a series of investigations to determine the
source of the agreeable flavor existing in sound wheat, and—as modified
by milling and cooking—in commercial wheat flour and the foods prepared
therefrom. The results of the researches of Prof. Henry B. Hill,
of Harvard University, and of those contemporaneously conducted by
Adolph Baeyer, of Munich, led him to conclude that to the oil known as
“furfurol,” existing in the exterior bran and interior cellulose of the
grain, the flour and bread chiefly owed their desirable flavors. The
cellulose of the interior of the wheat was found to contain enough of
the flavoring oil to impart to the insipid gluten an agreeable taste.
Accordingly, methods were devised for separating the gluten and the
cellulose from most of the starch, these three elements alone remaining
after the bran coats were peeled off.

This “whole wheat gluten,” as it is termed by the company, has proved
a most valuable food, not only for the diabetic, to whom it seems to
present the chief hope of recovery, but to the dyspeptic and feeble,
whether in brain or body. Its use has been attended with such signally
successful results as to attract the attention of large numbers of
prominent medical men, among whom I may mention Prof. Austin Flint, of
Bellevue Hospital Medical College, New York city, who passes upon it a
warm encomium in his last great volume. [See Flint’s Clinical Medicine,
pp. 452-53.]

If I did not feel quite certain that the vast majority of those who
shall peruse this paragraph would seek from the Health Food Company, or
from some of its many agents in various parts of the country, the very
able and interesting pamphlets which it mails free to all applicants,
I should deem it my duty to allude to other and not less valuable
applications of scientific thought to the vast problems involved in
the preparation of foods for humanity, from infancy to old age. To
adequately describe them all, would require a volume; let me content
myself with an allusion to one or two of the many.

There is a digestive element existing in the saliva and in the fluid
called the “pancreatic juice,” which bears the name of “diastase.” This
diastase exists nowhere outside of the animal economy, except in seeds
during the process of germination, or sprouting. When the seed, or
cereal, or vegetable, is exposed to proper influences of moisture and
warmth, such, for example, as are supplied by the earth in spring-time,
the process of germination begins, and from the germ diastase is
liberated. The function of the diastase thus set free is the conversion
of the food elements in the seed into assimilative nutriment for the
young and tender plant. It is the digestant of food, whether the
thing fed be plant or animal. Now, while physiologists have long been
ready to concede that when, as is common in diseased conditions, this
important digestant is absent from the saliva and pancreatic juice,
the conversion of all starchy foods is suspended, it has not been
supposed that diastase has any marked influence upon the emulsification
and digestion of food-substances not containing starch, nor had any
food-chemist availed himself of the diastase in cereals, if I except
the development and possible subsequent retention, to some extent, of
diastase in some of the preparations of malt. The Health Food Company
develops and employs the cereal diastase in a most effective way. It
removes the germinal molecules from wheat and barley, reduces them to
powder, forms the powder into a dough, encloses it in a steam-tight
vessel and subjects the vessel and contents for a protracted period to
a temperature of 150ºF. The latent diastase is thus brought into being,
while the low temperature and the close vessel completely prevent its
volatilization and loss. The diastatic dough is subsequently dried and
powdered, and is then packed and labeled, ready for use, demanding no
cooking, and no other preparation than simple moistening with milk
or water. Used with milk it is found to prevent that tough and curdy
coagulation which renders milk so oppressive, “bilious” and indigestible
in many cases. The name given to this diastatic food which I have
mentioned, is “The Universal Food,” a name suggested by a leading
physician, who believed it to be universally applicable to enfeebled
conditions in which better nourishment was needed. It is admirably
adapted to the nourishment of infants, as diastase is almost entirely
lacking during the first years of life, and may wisely be supplied from
exterior sources.

The Company’s great work for the multitude, however, is in the
preparation of wheat, oats, barley, rye, corn, peas, beans, and other
seeds. These are perfectly cleansed from all impurities, the outer
bran-coats, husks, and pellicles are removed, and the interior,
soluble, digestible food-portion is admirably prepared for ready
cooking. Persons who have a distaste for Graham and crushed wheat, and
oat-meal and other cereals, find in the Fine Granulated Wheat, the
Coarse Granulated Wheat, the Pearled Wheat, Pearled Oats, Granulated
Oats, Granulated Barley, Rye, Corn, etc., manufactured by this Company,
delicious foods, which, once adopted, are continued from choice.

I leave this important subject with my readers, again urging them
to seek to learn more concerning it. To be placed in possession of
information which I do not assume to be competent to impart, it is only
necessary that you address a postal card to the Health Food Company,
No. 74 Fourth Ave., cor. 10th street, New York, N. Y., asking for all
its Health Food literature, and appending your address, and you will be
quite certain to receive the entertaining pamphlets by due course of
mail. The agents of the company, also, cordially respond to calls for
circulars and orders for the Health Foods.


Let me ask my readers not to content themselves with sending for and
perusing, however carefully, the instructive pamphlets of the Health
Food Company. If you are sick you will do well to describe your
condition by letter to the company, and its medical head will write
you which of the foods are adapted to your case; you can then order a
supply of such as he advises. If you are in good health and merely seek
to supply yourself with delicate and nutritive substances which will
have the effect to keep you strong and well, you will be able to select
from their list, without special advice. Advice from the medical man
of the organization costs nothing, however, and should be asked in all
doubtful or diseased states. J. F. C.




                         Health Food Company’s

                            LIST OF AGENTS:


    =Main Office=, 74 Fourth Avenue New York City.

    7 Clinton Street                   Brooklyn, N. Y.
    199 Tremont Street                 Boston, Mass.
    632 Arch Street                    Philadelphia, Pa.
    2227 Walnut Street                 St. Louis, Mo.
    4934 Main Street                   Germantown. Pa.
    965 Grand Street                   New Haven, Ct.
    17 Central Row                     Hartford, Ct.
    217 Ross Street                    Brooklyn, E. D., N. Y.
    191 Genesee Street                 Utica, N. Y.
    1436 Wabash Avenue                 Chicago, Ill.
    1325 F. Street                     Washington, D. C.
    214 Main Street                    Elizabeth, N. J.
    132 East Main Street               Rochester, N. Y.
    217 Sutter Street                  San Francisco, Cal.
    426 Pine Street                    San Francisco, Cal.
    951 Broadway                       Oakland, Cal.
    306 Lexington Street               Baltimore, Md.
    34 Washington Avenue S.            Minneapolis, Minn.
    273 W 5th Street                   St. Paul, Minn.
    No. 1 North Bruntsfield Place      Edinburgh, Scotland.


AN UNSOLICITED LETTER FROM A PROMINENT PHYSICIAN OF NEW YORK.

“_To The Health Food Company, 74 4th Avenue, New York._

  GENTLEMEN:—

I should like to state to your Company the great success I have had
in using your Gluten Suppositories, and the advisability of letting
the medical profession generally know of this simple and efficacious
remedy for constipation. I have prescribed these Suppositories almost
daily in my practice this winter, and have often been astonished at the
permanent results obtained. It seems that in great torpor of the rectum
and descending colon it is especially useful.

I recollect a little girl in 52nd street, where the constipation was so
great that very often—much against my will—I was forced to administer
a dose of Castor Oil. Since the use of these Gluten Suppositories she
has remained well—over six months. It does not cure _all_ cases, but in
all the instances where patients have given it a good, fair trial, some
benefit has been derived.

You may utilize this endorsement if it will make this remedy more
widely known among the profession.

  Respectfully,
  J. MONTFORT SCHLEY, M. D.,”


 _Surgeon to N. Y. Ophthalmic Hospital, Professor Physical Diagnosis
 Women’s Medical College; Attending Physician at Hahnemann Hospital,
 &c._




  THE HEALTH FOOD COMPANY OF NEW YORK


Is now in the twelfth year of its existence. Its valuable and important
work has been recognized and commended by thousands of physicians, by
many writers for the medical and general press, and by multitudes of
the sick and suffering who have found health and comfort through its
products. It has had many imitators, but it has conscientiously adhered
to its original mission of preparing


Perfect Foods for Sick and Well.

Basing its work upon exact science, and being presided over by a
scientific man, it has gained the support and co-operation of the
scientific world. A year or two since, a competitor in the manufacture
of a single article, known as “Whole Wheat Flour,” secured the
publication of an article from the pen of a Dr. Ephraim Cutter—styling
himself “a microscopist”—in which he asserted his ability to determine
the relative percentages of gluten and starch by the use of the
microscope alone. He furthermore said that while the food-value of
a bread-flour depended upon its percentage of gluten, the various
flours of the Health Food Company contained no gluten whatever; and
that the flour made by the “Franklin Mills” (Dr. Cutter’s employer)
was so rich in gluten as to make it “a blessing to mankind.” These
grossly absurd statements called forth some very scathing criticisms
and much ridicule by the medical and secular press, and induced Prof.
R. H. Thurston, of the Stevens Institute of Technology—who had derived
benefit from the Health Foods—to invite his colleague, Prof. Albert
N. Leeds, Public Analyst for the State of New Jersey and Professor of
Chemistry in the Stevens Institute, to microscopically examine and
chemically analyze the food substances alluded to, for the purpose of
determining the accuracy or inaccuracy of Cutter’s statements, and,
furthermore, to settle the question of the value of the “microscopic
analysis,” for which so much had been claimed by Cutter. Prof. Leeds’
careful work conclusively showed that the microscope was _valuable to
detect adulterations_, but valueless as a means of determining the
percentages of the various natural constituents of a cereal flour;
so he proceeded to apply the crucial test of chemical analysis, with
striking results. (In our limited space we can only briefly quote from
the Professor’s published statement, but we are assured that he will
cheerfully mail a copy of the pamphlet to any one who shall address
him at the College named, situated in Hoboken, New Jersey.) Premising
that wheat in its natural state contains, on the average, about 12
per cent. of albuminoids—chiefly gluten—he found in the Health Food
Company’s Whole Wheat Flour 16.74 per cent. of this substance. Of the
“Franklin Mills” flour, said to be made from “entire wheat,” he writes:
“It contains 8.55 per cent. of albuminoids, chiefly gluten, together
with a very large percentage of cellulose or finely-ground bran. It is
greatly lacking in nutritive elements.”

Prof. Leeds testifies that the Glutens prepared by the Health Food
Company are richer in the gluten element than any which he has been
able to obtain, whether of American or foreign origin, and more than
twice as rich as a so-called gluten made by Farwell & Rhines, of
Rochester. He also finds by analysis that “Robinson’s Prepared Barley
Flour” contains only 5.13 per cent. of albuminoids, while the Health
Food Company’s barley flour, retailing for less than one-eighth as
much, contains 13.83 per cent., showing it to be nearly three times
as rich in substantial nutriment. The flours and foods of the Health
Food Company are nourishing in health and remedial in sickness. Their
good work is in the improvement of the blood-making processes, in
better digestion, in increased nutrition. It is their function to ably
supplement all such remedial measures as skill and science may suggest.
Many physicians have testified to the increased readiness of diseases
to yield to their treatment when the patients have been sustained by
the bland, soluble, non-irritating, nourishing nutriments prepared by
the Health Food Company. Its products still stand at the head of the
long list of food-preparations for infants and invalids, for the sick
who seek to recover health and strength, for the strong who desire to
remain strong. It has elevated food and its preparation to the dignity
of a science, and has sought to render itself wholly worthy of the warm
encomiums so ably pronounced by scholars, physicians, and scientists,
conspicuous among whom stand the Rev. John F. Clymer and Prof. Austin
Flint.

Pamphlets, price-lists, and all particulars are freely mailed to all
inquirers. Address,

HEALTH FOOD COMPANY,
74 Fourth Avenue, cor. Tenth Street,
next door to Stewart’s, New York, N. Y.




WORKS PUBLISHED BY

FOWLER & WELLS CO., New York.


PHRENOLOGY AND PHYSIOGNOMY.

 =Phrenological Journal and Science of Health.=—Devoted to Ethnology,
 Physiology, Phrenology, Physiognomy, Psychology, Sociology, Biography,
 Education, Literature, etc., with Measures to Reform, Elevate, and
 Improve Mankind Physically, Mentally, and Spiritually. Monthly, $2.00
 a year; 20c. a number. Bound vols. $3.00.

 =Expression=: its Anatomy and Philosophy. Illustrated by Sir Charles
 Bell. Additional Notes and Illustrations by SAMUEL R. WELLS. $1.

 =Education of the Feelings and Affections.= Charles Bray. Edited by
 NELSON SIZER. Cloth, $1.50.

 This work gives full and definite directions for the cultivation
 or restraining of all the faculties relating to the feelings or
 affections.

 =Combe’s System of Phrenology=; With 100 Engravings. $1.25.

 =Combe’s Constitution of Man=; Considered in Relation to external
 objects. With twenty engravings, and portrait of author. $1.25.

 The “Constitution of Man” is a work with which every teacher and every
 pupil should be acquainted.

 =Combe’s Lectures on Phrenology=; with Notes, an Essay on the
 Phrenological Mode of Investigation, and an Historical Sketch, by A.
 BOARDMAN, M. D. $1.25.

 =Combe’s Moral Philosophy=; or, the Duties of Man considered in his
 Individual, Domestic, and Social Capacities. $1.25.

 =How to Study Character; or, the True Basis for the Science of Mind.=
 Including a Review of Bain’s Criticism of Phrenology. By Thos. A.
 Hyde. 50c.; clo. $1.00.

 =New Descriptive Chart=, for the Use of examiners in the Delineation
 of Character. By S. R. Wells. 25c.

 =New Physiognomy; or, Signs of Character=, as manifested through
 Temperament and External Forms, and especially in the “Human Face
 Divine.” With more than One Thousand Illustrations. By Samuel R. Wells.
 In one 12mo volume, 768 pages, muslin, $5.00; in heavy calf, marbled
 edges, $8.00; Turkey morocco, full gilt, $10.00.

 “The treatise of Mr. Wells, which is admirably printed and profusely
 illustrated, is probably the most complete hand-book upon the subject
 in the language.”—_N. Y. Tribune._

 =How to read Character.=—A new illustrated Hand-book of Phrenology and
 Physiognomy, for Students and Examiners, with a chart for recording
 the sizes of the different Organs of the brain in the Delineation of
 Character; with upward of 170 Engravings. By S. R. Wells. $1.25.

 =Wedlock; or, The Right Relations of the Sexes.= Disclosing the Laws
 of Conjugal Selection, and showing Who May Marry. By S. R. Wells.
 $1.50; gilt, $2.00.

 =Brain and Mind=; or, Mental Science Considered in Accordance with the
 Principles of Phrenology and in Relation to Modern Physiology. H. S.
 DRAYTON, M. D., AND J. MCNEIL. $1.50.

 This is the latest and best work published. It constitutes a complete
 textbook of Phrenology, is profusely illustrated, and well adapted to
 the use of students.

 =Indications of Character=, as manifested in the general shape of the
 head and the form of the face. H. S. DRAYTON, M. D. Illus. 25c.

 =How to Study Phrenology.=—With Suggestions to students, Lists of Best
 Works, Constitutions for Societies, etc. 12mo. paper, 10c.

 =Choice of Pursuits; or What to Do and Why.= Describing Seventy-five
 Trades and Professions, and the Temperaments and Talents required for
 each. With Portraits and Biographies of many successful Thinkers and
 Workers. By Nelson Sizer. $1.75.

 =How to Teach According to Temperament and Mental Development=;
 or, Phrenology in the Schoolroom and the Family. By Nelson Sizer.
 Illustrated. $1.50.

 =Forty Years in Phrenology.=—Embracing Recollections of History,
 Anecdotes and Experience. $1.50.

 =Thoughts on Domestic Life=; or, Marriage Vindicated and Free Love
 Exposed. 25c.

 =Cathechism of Phrenology.=—Illustrating the Principles of the Science
 by means of Questions and Answers. Revised and enlarged by Nelson
 Sizer. 50c.

 =Heads and Faces; How to Study Them.= A Complete Manual of Phrenology
 and Physiognomy for the People. By Prof. Nelson Sizer and H. S.
 Drayton, M.D. Nearly 200 octavo pages and 200 illustrations, price in
 paper, 40c.; ex. clo. $1.00.

 All claim to know something of How to Read Character, but very few
 understand all the Signs of Character as shown in the Head and Face.
 This is a study of which one never tires; it is always fresh, for
 you have always new text-books. The book is really a great Album of
 Portraits, and will be found of interest for the illustrations alone.

 =Memory and Intellectual Improvement=, applied to Self-Education and
 Juvenile Instruction. By O. S. FOWLER. $1.00.

 The best work on the subject.

 =Hereditary Descent.=—Its Laws and Facts applied to Human Improvement.
 By O. S. Fowler. Illustrated. $1.00.

 =The Science of the Mind applied to Teaching=: Including the Human
 Temperaments and their influence upon the Mind; The Analysis of the
 Mental Faculties and how to develop and train them; The Theory of
 Education and of the School, and Normal Methods of teaching the common
 English branches. By Prof. U. J. HOFFMAN. Profusely illustrated. $1.50.

 =Reminiscences= OF DR. SPURZHEIM AND GEORGE COMBE, and a Review of the
 Science of Phrenology from the period of the discovery by Dr. GALL to
 the time of the visit of GEORGE COMBE to the United States, with a
 portrait of Dr. SPURZHEIM, by NAHUM CAPEN, L.L.D. Ex. clo. $1.25.

 =Education and Self-Improvement Complete=; Comprising “Physiology,
 Animal and Mental,” “Self-culture and Perfection of Character,”
 “Memory and Intellectual Improvement.” By O. S. FOWLER. One large vol.
 Illus. $3.00.

 =Self-Culture and Perfection of Character=; Including the Management
 of Children and Youth. $1.00.

 One of the best of the author’s works.

 =Physiology, Animal and Mental=: Applied to the Preservation and
 Restoration of Health of Body and Power of Mind. $1.00.

 =Phrenology Proved, Illustrated, and Applied.= Embracing an Analysis
 of the Primary Mental Powers in their Various Degrees of Development,
 and location of the Phrenological Organs. The Mental Phenomena
 produced by their combined action, and the location of the faculties
 amply illustrated. By the Fowler Brothers. $1.25.

 =Self-Instructor in Phrenology and Physiology.= With over One Hundred
 Engravings and a Chart for Phrenologists, for the Recording of
 Phrenological Development. By the Fowler Brothers. 75c.

 =Phrenological Miscellany of Illustrated Annuals of Phrenology
 and Physiognomy=, from 1865 to 1878 combined in one volume,
 containing over 400 illustrations, many portraits and biographies of
 distinguished personages. $1.50.

 =Redfield’s Comparative Physiognomy=; or, resemblances Between Men and
 Animals. Illustrated. $2.50.

 =Phrenology and the Scriptures.=—Showing the Harmony between
 Phrenology and the Bible. 15 cents.

 =Phrenological Chart.= A Symbolical Head 12 inches across,
 Lithographed in colors, on paper 19 × 24 inches, mounted for hanging
 on the wall, or suitable for framing. $1.00.

 =Education; its Elementary Principles Founded on the Nature of Man.=
 By J. G. Spurzheim, $1.25.

 =Natural Laws of Man.=—A Philosophical Catechism. Sixth Edition.
 Enlarged and improved by J. G. Spurzheim, M.D. 50 cents.

 =Lectures on Mental Science.=—According to the Philosophy of
 Phrenology. Delivered before the Anthropological Society. By Rev. G.
 S. Weaver. Illustrated. $1.00.

 =Phrenological Bust.=—Showing the latest classification and exact
 location of the Organs of the Brain. It is divided so as to show each
 individual Organ on one side; with all the groups—Social, Executive,
 Intellectual, and Moral—classified, on the other. Large size (not
 mailable) $1. Small 50 cents.


WORKS ON MAGNETISM.

There is an increasing interest in the facts relating to Magnetism,
etc., and we present below a list of Works on this subject.

 =Library of Mesmerism and Psychology.=—Comprising the Philosophy of
 Mesmerism, Clairvoyance, Mental Electricity.—FASCINATION, or the
 Power of Charming. Illustrating the Principles of Life in connection
 with Spirit and Matter.—THE MACROCOSM, or the Universe Without,
 being an unfolding of the plan of Creation and the Correspondence
 of Truths.—THE PHILOSOPHY OF ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY: the Doctrine
 of Impressions, including the connection between Mind and Matter,
 also, the Treatment of Diseases.—PSYCHOLOGY, or the Science of
 the Soul, considered Physiologically and Philosophically; with an
 Appendix containing Notes of Mesmeric and Psychical experience and
 Illustrations of the Brain and Nervous System. $3.50.

 =Philosophy of Mesmerism.=—By Dr. John Bovee Dods. 50 cents.

 =Philosophy of Electrical Psychology=, A course of Twelve Lectures.
 $1.00.

 =Practical Instructions in Animal Magnetism.= By J. P. F. Deleuze.
 Translated by Thomas C. Hartshorn. New and Revised edition, with
 an appendix of notes by the Translator, and Letters from Eminent
 Physicians, and others. $2.00.

 =History of Salem Witchcraft.=—A review of Charles W. Upham’s great
 Work from the _Edinburgh Review_, with Notes by Samuel R. Wells,
 containing, also, The Planchette Mystery, Spiritualism, by Mrs.
 Harriet Beecher Stowe, and Dr. Doddridge’s Dream. $1.00.

 =Fascination; or, the Philosophy of Charming.= Illustrating the
 Principles of Life in connection with Spirit and Matter. By J. B.
 Newman, M.D. $1.00.

 =How to Magnetize, or Magnetism and Clairvoyance.=—A Practical
 Treatise on the Choice, Management and Capabilities of Subjects with
 Instructions on the Method of Procedure. By J. V. Wilson. 25c.


HEALTH BOOKS.

_This List Comprises the Best Works on Hygiene, Health, Etc._

 =Health in the Household, or Hygienic Cookery=; by Susanna W. Dodds,
 M. D. 12mo. ex. clo, $2.00.

 A novice in housekeeping will not be puzzled by this admirable book,
 it is so simple, systematic, practical and withal productive of much
 household pleasure, not only by means of the delicious food prepared
 from its recipes, but through the saving of labor and care to the
 housewife.

 =Household Remedies.=—For the prevalent Disorders of the Human
 Organism, by Felix Oswald, M. D. 12mo. pp. 229, $1.00.

 The author of this work is one of the keenest and most critical
 writers on medical subjects now before the public; he writes soundly
 and practically. He is an enthusiastic apostle of the gospel of
 hygiene. We predict that his book will win many converts to the faith
 and prove a valuable aid to those who are already of the faith but are
 asking for “more light.” Among the special ailments herein considered
 are Consumption, Asthma, Dyspepsia, Climatic Fevers, Enteric
 Disorders, Nervous Maladies, Catarrh, Pleurisy, etc.

 =The Temperaments, or Varieties of Physical Constitution in Man=,
 considered in their relation to Mental Character and Practical Affairs
 of Life. With an Introduction by H. S. Drayton, A. M., Editor of the
 PHRENOLOGICAL JOURNAL. 150 Portraits and other illustrations, by D. H.
 Jacques, M. D. $1.50.

 =How to Grow Handsome, or Hints toward Physical Perfection=, and the
 Philosophy of Human Beauty, showing How to Acquire and Retain Bodily
 Symmetry, Health and Vigor, secure long life and avoid the infirmities
 and deformities of age. New Edition, $1.00.

 =Medical Electricity.=—A Manual for Students, showing the most
 Scientific and Rational Application to all forms of Diseases, of the
 different combinations of Electricity, Galvanism, Electro-Magnetism,
 Magneto-Electricity, and Human Magnetism, by W. White, M. D. $1.50.

 =The Man Wonderful in the House Beautiful.=—An allegory teaching the
 Principles of Physiology and Hygiene, and the effects of Stimulants
 and Narcotics, by Drs. C. B. and Mary A. Allen. $1.50.

 To all who enjoy studies pertaining to the human body this book will
 prove a boon. The accomplished physician, the gentle mother, the
 modest girl, and the wide-awake school-boy will find pleasure in its
 perusal. It is wholly unlike any book previously published on the
 subject, and is such a thorough teacher that progressive parents
 cannot afford to do without it.

 =The Family Physician.=—A Ready Prescriber and Hygienic Adviser, With
 Reference to the Nature, Causes, Prevention and Treatment of Diseases,
 Accidents and Casualties of every kind, with a Glossary and copious
 Index. Illustrated with nearly three hundred engravings, by Joel Shew,
 M. D. $3.

 =How to Feed the Baby to Make her Healthy and Happy=, by C. E. Page,
 M. D. 12mo., third edition, revised and enlarged. Paper, 50c, extra
 cloth, 75c.

 This is the most important work ever published on the subject of
 infant dietetics.

 =The Natural Cure of Consumption=, Constipation, Bright’s Disease,
 Neuralgia, Rheumatism, Colds, Fevers, etc. How these Disorders
 Originate, and How to Prevent Them. By C. E. Page, M. D., cloth, $1.00.

 =Horses, their Feed and their Feet.= A Manual of Horse Hygiene.
 Invaluable to the veteran or the novice, pointing out the true sources
 of disease, and how to prevent and counteract them. By C. E. Page. M.
 D. Paper 50c.; cloth 75c.

 This is the best book on the care of horses ever published, worth many
 times its cost to every horse owner.

 =The Movement Cure.=—The History and Philosophy of this System of
 Medical Treatment, with examples of Single Movements, The Principles
 of Massage, and directions for their Use in various Forms of Chronic
 Diseases. New edition by G. H. Taylor, M. D., $1.50.

 =Massage.=—Giving the Principles and directions for its application in
 all Forms of Chronic Diseases, by G. H. Taylor, M. D. $1.00.

 =The Science of a New Life.=—By John Cowan, M. D. Ex. clo. $3.00.

 =Tobacco: Its Physical, Intellectual and Moral Effects on the Human
 System=, by Dr. Alcott. New and revised edition with notes and
 additions by N. Sizer. 25c.

 =Sober and Temperate Life.=—The Discourses and Letters of Louis
 Cornaro on a Sober and Temperate Life. 50c.

 =Smoking and Drinking.= By James Parton. 50c.; cloth, 75c.

 =Food and Diet.= With observations on the Dietetical Regimen, suited
 for Disordered States of the Digestive Organs, by J. Pereira, M. D.,
 F.R.S. $1.50.

 =Principles Applied to the Preservation of Health= and the Improvement
 of Physical and Mental Education, by Andrew Combe, M. D. Illustrated,
 cloth, $1.50.

 =Water Cure in Chronic Diseases.= An Exposition of the Causes,
 Progress, and Termination of various Chronic Diseases of the Digestive
 Organs, Lungs, Nerves, Limbs and Skin, and of their Treatment by Water
 and other Hygienic Means. By J. M. Gully, M. D. $1.25.

 =Science of Human Life.= With a copious Index and Biographical Sketch
 of the author, Sylvester Graham. Illustrated, $3.00.

 =Management of Infancy, Physiological and Moral Treatment.= With Notes
 and a Supplementary Chapter, $1.25.

 =Diet Question.=—Giving the Reason Why, from “Health in the
 Household,” by S. W. Dodds, M. D. 25c.

 =Health Miscellany.=—An important collection of Health Papers. Nearly
 100 octavo pages. 25c.

 =How to Be Well, or Common Sense Medical Hygiene.= A book for the
 People, giving directions for the Treatment and Cure of Acute Diseases
 without the use of Drug Medicines; also General Hints on Health. $1.00.

 =Foreordained.=—A Story of Heredity and of Special Parental
 Influences, by an Observer. 12mo. pp. 90 Paper, 50c.; extra cloth, 75c.

 =Consumption=, Its Prevention and Cure by the Movement Cure. 25c.

 =Notes on Beauty, Vigor and Development=; or, How to Acquire Plumpness
 of Form, Strength of Limb and Beauty of Complexion. Illustrated. 10c.

 =Tea and Coffee.=—Their Physical, Intellectual and Moral Effects on
 the Human System, by Dr. Alcott. New and revised edition with notes
 and additions by Nelson Sizer. 25c.

 =Accidents and Emergencies=, a guide containing Directions for the
 Treatment in Bleeding, Cuts, Sprains, Ruptures, Dislocations, Burns
 and Scalds, Bites of Mad Dogs, Choking, Poisons, Fits, Sunstrokes,
 Drowning, etc., by Alfred Smee, with Notes and additions by R. T.
 Trall, M. D. New and revised edition. 25c.

 =Special List.=—We have in addition to the above, Private Medical
 Works and Treatises. This Special List will be sent on receipt of
 stamp.


WORKS ON HYGIENE BY R. T. TRALL, M. D.

_These works may be considered standard from the reformatory hygienic
standpoint. Thousands of people owe their lives and good health to
their teaching._

 =Hydropathic Encyclopedia.=—A System of Hydropathy and Hygiene.
 Physiology of the Human Body; Dietetics and Hydropathic Cookery;
 Theory and Practice of Water-Treatment; Special Pathology and
 Hydro-Therapeutics, including the Nature, Causes, Symptoms and
 Treatment of all known diseases; Application of Hydropathy to
 Midwifery and the Nursery with nearly One Thousand Pages including a
 Glossary. 2 vols. in one. $4

 =Hygienic Hand-Book.=—Intended as a Practical Guide for the Sick-room.
 Arranged alphabetically. $1.25.

 =Illustrated Family Gymnasium.=—Containing the most improved methods
 of applying Gymnastic, Calisthentic, Kinesipathic and Vocal Exercises
 to the Development of the Bodily Organs, the invigoration of their
 functions, the preservation of Health, and the Cure of Diseases and
 Deformities. $1.25.

 =The Hydropathic Cook-Book=, with Recipes for Cooking on Hygienic
 Principles. Containing also, a Philosophical Exposition of the
 Relations of Food to Health; the Chemical Elements and Proximate
 Constitution of Alimentary Principles; the Nutritive Properties of
 all kinds of Aliments; the Relative value of Vegetable and Animal
 Substances; the Selection and Preservation of Dietetic Material, etc.
 $1.00.

 =Fruits and Farinacea the Proper Food of Man.=—Being an attempt
 to prove by History, Anatomy, Physiology, and Chemistry that the
 Original, Natural and Best Diet of Man is derived from the Vegetable
 Kingdom. By John Smith. With Notes by Trall. $1.25.

 =Digestion and Dyspepsia.=—A Complete Explanation of the Physiology of
 the Digestive Processes, with the Symptoms and Treatment of Dyspepsia
 and other Disorders. Illustrated. $1.00.

 =The Mother’s Hygienic Hand-Book= for the Normal Development and
 Training of Women and Children, and the Treatment of their Diseases.
 $1.00.

 =Popular Physiology.=—A Familiar Exposition of the Structures,
 Functions and Relations of the Human System and the Preservation of
 Health. $1.25.

 =The True Temperance Platform.=—An Exposition of the Fallacy of
 Alcoholic Medication. 50 cents.

 =The Alcoholic Controversy.=—A Review of the _Westminster Review_ on
 the Physiological Errors of Teetotalism. 50 cents.

 =The Human Voice.=—Its Anatomy, Physiology, Pathology, Therapeutics
 and Training, with Rules of Order for Lyceums. 50 cents.

 =The True Healing Art; or, Hygienic _vs._ Drug Medication.= An Address
 delivered before the Smithsonian Institute, Washington, D. C. 25 cts.;
 clo., 50 cents.

 =Water-Cure for the Million.=—The processes of Water-Cure Explained,
 Rules for Bathing, Dieting, Exercising, Recipes for Cooking, etc.,
 etc. Directions for Home Treatment. Paper, 15 cts.

 =Hygeian Home Cook-Book; or, Healthful and Palatable Food without
 Condiments.= 25 cts.; clo., 50 cents.

 =Diseases of Throat and Lungs.=—Including Diphtheria and its Proper
 Treatment. 25 cents.

 =The Bath.=—Its History and Uses in Health and Disease. 25c.; clo.,
 50c.

 =A Health Catechism.=—Questions and Answers. With Illus. 15c.




A NEW BOOK.

HEALTH IN THE HOUSEHOLD;

OR,

HYGIENIC COOKERY.

By SUSANNA W. DODDS, M.D.

One large 12mo vol., 600 pp., extra cloth or oil-cloth, Price, $2.00.


The author of this work is specially qualified for her task, as she
is both a physician and a practical housekeeper. It is unquestionably
the best work ever written on the healthful preparation of food, and
should be in the hands of every housekeeper who wishes to prepare
food healthfully and palatably. The best way and the reason why are
given. It is complete in every department. To show something of what is
thought of this work, we copy a few brief extracts from the many


NOTICES OF THE PRESS.

 “This work contains a good deal of excellent advice about wholesome
 food, and gives directions for preparing many dishes in a way that
 will make luxuries for the palate out of many simple productions of
 Nature which are now lost by a vicious cookery.”—_Home Journal._

 “Another book on cookery, and one that appears to be fully the
 equal in all respects, and superior to many of its predecessors.
 Simplicity is sought to be blended with science, economy with all
 the enjoyments of the table, and health and happiness with an ample
 household liberality. Every purse and every taste will find in Mrs.
 Dodds’ book, material within its means of grasp for efficient kitchen
 administration.”—_N. Y. Star._

 “The book can not fail to be of great value in every household to
 those who will intelligently appreciate the author’s stand-point.
 And there are but few who will not concede that it would be a public
 benefit if our people generally would become better informed as to the
 better mode of living than the author intends.”—_Scientific American._

 “She evidently knows what she is writing about, and her book is
 eminently practical upon every page. It is more than a book of recipes
 for making soups, and pies, and cake; it is an educator of how to make
 the home the abode of healthful people.”—_The Daily Inter-Ocean_,
 Chicago, Ill.

 “The book is a good one, and should be given a place in every
 well-regulated cuisine.”—_Indianapolis Journal._

 “As a comprehensive work on the subject of healthful cookery,
 there is no other in print which is superior, and which brings the
 subject so clearly and squarely to the understanding of an average
 housekeeper.”—_Methodist Recorder._

 “In this book Dr. Dodds deals with the whole subject scientifically,
 and yet has made her instructions entirely practical. The book
 will certainly prove useful, and if its precepts could be
 universally followed, without doubt human life would be considerably
 lengthened.”—_Springfield Union._

 “Here is a cook-book prepared by an educated lady physician. It
 seems to be a very sensible addition to the voluminous literature on
 this subject, which ordinarily has little reference to the hygienic
 character of the preparations which are described.”—_Zion’s Herald._

 “This one seems to us to be most sensible and practical, while yet
 based upon scientific principles—in short, the best. If it were in
 every household, there would be far less misery in the world.”—_South
 and West._

 “There is much good sense in the book, and there is plenty of occasion
 for attacking the ordinary methods of cooking, as well as the common
 style of diet.”—_Morning Star._

 “She sets forth the why and wherefore of cookery, and devotes the
 larger portion of the work to those articles essential to good blood,
 strong bodies, and vigorous minds.”—_New Haven Register._


The work will be sent to any address, by mail, post-paid, on receipt of
price, $2.00. AGENTS WANTED, to whom special terms will be given. Send
for terms. Address

FOWLER & WELLS CO., Publishers, 775 Broadway, New York.




Healthful and Palatable.


The most important question with all interested and intelligent
housekeepers should be “What can I prepare for my table that will be
HEALTHFUL and PALATABLE?” The world is full of Cook Books and Receipt
Books, but in nearly every case not the slightest attention is given to
the health and strength giving qualities of the dishes described, and
a large part of the directions are useless (for never followed) and in
many cases harmful (if tried).

What is needed is a practical work in which these conditions are
carefully considered and one which is simple enough to be easily
understood.

A recent publication, HEALTH IN THE HOUSEHOLD, by Dr. S. W. Dodd, a
lady physician and a practical housekeeper, covers this ground very
fully and can be recommended. It considers the value of the different
food products, the best methods of preparation, and the reason why.

 The Chicago _Inter-Ocean_ says: “She evidently knows what she is
 writing about, and her book is eminently practical upon every page. It
 is more than a book of recipes for making soups, and pies, and cakes;
 it is an educator of how to make the home the abode of healthful
 people.”

 “She sets forth the why and wherefore of cookery, and
 devotes the larger portion of the work to those articles essential to
 good blood, strong bodies, and vigorous minds,” says _The New Haven
 Register_.

Housekeepers who consult this will be able to provide for the household
that which will positively please and increase the happiness by
increasing the healthful conditions.

It contains 600 large pages, bound in extra cloth or oil cloth binding,
and is sold at $2. Sent by mail or express, prepaid, on receipt of
price. Address

FOWLER & WELLS CO., Publishers, 775 Broadway, N.Y.


 THE NATURAL CURE: CONSUMPTION, DYSPEPSIA, NERVOUS DISEASES, GOUT,
 RHEUMATISM, INSOMNIA (SLEEPLESSNESS), BRIGHT’S DISEASE, ETC. BY C. E.
 PAGE, M.D. 12MO, CLOTH, $1.00.


A FEW OF THE MANY NOTES FROM READERS.

J. RUSS, Jr., Haverhill, Mass., says: “Dr. Page’s explanation of the
colds question is alone worth the price of a hundred copies of the
book—it is, in fact, invaluable, going to the very root of the question
of sickness.” Mrs. W. O. THOMPSON, 71 Irving Place, Brooklyn, N.
Y., says: “I wish every friend I have could read it, and, only that
hygienists never harbor ill-feeling, that my enemies might not chance
to find it. I owe much to the truths made clear in ‘Natural Cure,’ and
it is certain that to it and the professional attendance of the author,
my sister-in-law owes her life and present robust health.”

FROM A TEACHER.

Mrs. S. S. GAGE, teacher in the Adelphi Academy, Brooklyn, N. Y., says:
“My friend, Mrs. Thompson, recommended this book (‘Natural Cure’) to
me. Thanks to her and ‘the book,’ my old headaches trouble me no more;
I am better in every way. I never could accomplish so much and with
so little fatigue; and I am sure that all my intellectual work is of
better quality than it ever was before.”

FROM A HUSBAND.

D. THOMPSON, Lee, N. H., says: “Through following the advice in
‘Natural Cure’ my headaches, which have tortured me at frequent
intervals for forty years, return no more. Formerly I could not work
for three days at a time, now I work right along. For this, as well as
for the restoration of my wife to health, after we had given her up as
fatally sick, I have to thank Dr. Page and ‘The Natural Cure.’”

FROM THE WIFE.

Mrs. S. E. D. THOMPSON, Lee, N. H. says: “I can not well express
my gratitude for the benefit I have received from the book and its
author’s personal counsel. Condemned to die, I am now well. It is truly
wonderful how the power of resting is increased under the influence of
the regimen prescribed. I have distributed many copies of this book,
and have known of a _life-long asthmatic cured, biliousness removed,
perennial hay-fever banished_ for good, and other wonderful changes
wrought, by means of the regimen formulated in ‘Natural Cure.’ A friend
remarked: ‘It is full of encouragement for those who wish to live in
clean bodies.’ Another said: ‘It has proved to me that I have been
committing slow suicide.’ Our minister says: ‘I have modified my diet
and feel like a new man.’” To this Mrs. Thompson adds, for the author’s
first book, “HOW TO FEED THE BABY”: “I have known of a number of babes
changed from colicky, fretful children to happy well ones, making them
a delight to their parents, by following its advice.”

WILLIAM C. LANGLEY, Newport, R. I., says: “While all would be benefited
from reading it, I would especially commend it to those who, from
inherited feebleness, or, like myself, had declined deeply, feel the
need of making the most of their limited powers. I may add, that this
work bears evidence that the author has had wide range, and extensive
reading, together with a natural fitness for physiological and hygienic
research, keen perception of natural law and tact in its application.”

Mrs. Dr. DENSMORE, 130 West 44th Street, New York, says: “You can judge
of my opinion of ‘Natural Cure’ when I tell you that I am buying it
of the publishers by the dozen to distribute among my patients.”

THE POPULAR SCIENCE MONTHLY for September, 1883, speaks highly of the
work, closing with, “the public has in this work a most valuable manual
of hygiene.”

THE ATLANTIC MONTHLY for August, 1883, says: “It is an effort at
impressing common-sense views of preserving and restoring health.”

Sent by mail, post-paid, on receipt of price, $1.00. Address

  FOWLER & WELLS CO., _Publishers_,
  775 Broadway, New York.


A STORY WORTH READING.

ABOUT HUMAN NATURE.


[Illustration: THE LABYRINTH (the inner ear)]

We have recently published a volume containing a story of Human Nature
which will be found of interest. It is called “The MAN WONDERFUL in
the HOUSE BEAUTIFUL,” and is an allegory, teaching the principles of
Physiology and Hygiene, and the effects of Stimulants and Narcotics.
The House is the Body, in which the Foundations are the Bones, the
Walls are Muscles, the Skin and Hair the Siding and Shingles, the
head an Observatory in which are found a pair of Telescopes, and
radiating from it are the nerves which are compared to a Telegraph,
while communications are kept up with the Kitchen, Dining-room,
Pantry, Laundry, etc. The House is heated with a Furnace. There are
also Mysterious Chambers, and the whole is protected by a Burglar
Alarm. In studying the inhabitant of the House, the “Man Wonderful,” we
learn of his growth, development, and habits of the guests whom he
introduces. He finds that some of them are friends, others are doubtful
acquaintances, and some decidedly wicked. Under this form, we ascertain
the effects of Food and Drink, Narcotics and Stimulants.

It is a wonderful book, and placed in the hands of children will
lead them to the study of Physiology and Hygiene, and the Laws of
Life and Health in a way that will never be forgotten. The book will
prove of great interest even to adults and those familiar with the
subject. The authors, Drs. C. B. and Mary A. Allen, are both regular
physicians, and therefore the work is accurate and on a scientific
basis. “Science in Story” has never been presented in a more attractive
form. It is universally admitted that a large proportion of sickness
comes from violations of the laws of Life and Health, and therefore it
is important that this subject should be understood by all, as in this
way we may become familiar with all the avoidable causes of disease.
The reading of this book will very largely accomplish this end. It will
be sent securely by mail, prepaid, on receipt of price, which is only
$1.50. Address

Fowler & Wells Co., Publishers, 775 Broadway, New York.


THE FAMILY PHYSICIAN,

A READY PRESCRIBER AND HYGIENIC ADVISER, WITH REFERENCE TO THE CAUSES,
PREVENTION AND TREATMENT OF DISEASE.

“WHAT THEY SAY”—NOTICES OF THE PRESS.

We give a few of the favorable notices which this work has received:


 It possesses the most practical utility of any of the author’s works,
 and is well adapted to give the reader an accurate idea of the
 organization and functions of the human frame.—_New York Tribune._

 The work is admirably simple, clear, and full, and no popular work
 that we ever saw had half its claims to notice. We hope it may have a
 wide circulation. Its mission is a most important one. It lies at the
 foundation of all other missions of reform. Let the world be informed
 in regard to the laws of health, and every other reform will have
 its way cleared. Till then, every effort for moral and intellectual
 improvement can be only partially and feebly effective.—_Boston
 Ledger._

 Without the fear of our family physician before our eyes, we say
 that this is a very good book to have in families. It contains much
 valuable instruction in the art of preserving and restoring health,
 which every man of common sense, who understands anything about the
 human frame, will see at once is, and must be, sound and reliable.
 It might, almost any day, be the means of saving a valuable life. We
 are honestly of the conviction that every household in the land would
 lessen its complaints and doctor’s bills, if they would read it and
 follow its suggestions.—_Boston Congregationalist._

 The different cases upon which it treats number over _nine hundred_ in
 each of which the symptoms, the cause, and the _manner of treatment
 are given in full_.—_Clinton Tribune._

 There is not a subject relating to health but what it treats upon, in
 an able manner.—_Howard Gazette._

 Its 516 pages abound with thousands of facts and suggestions of the
 _highest importance to all_.—_Christian Inquirer._

 It is the best work of the kind we have ever seen upon the subject,
 and ought to be _in every family_.—_Advertiser._

 It is very elaborate, and is one of the very best of medical works.
 Every family should have a copy.—_Star of the West._

 It is worth its weight in gold.—_Ellsworth Herald._

 We know of no book comparable to this as THE BOOK for a
 family.—_Columbia Democrat._

 It is a very able and excellent work, and one which we can heartily
 recommend to every family; it is everything that its name purports to
 be.—_Scientific American._

 It is a very comprehensive, valuable work, and cannot fail to exert a
 salutary effect upon the public mind.—_Baltimore Sun._

 We have no hesitancy in pronouncing it _a very useful book_, and one
 which should be in the possession of _every family_.—_Beaver Dam
 Republican._

 Familiarity with its contents will save many dollars’ worth of drugs,
 and avert many weary days and months of sickness.—_Musical World._

 The work embodies _a vast amount_ of information in regard to the
 structure and diseases of the human frame, which will be read with
 profit.—_N. England Farmer._

 Not only are diseases described, and the appropriate treatment pointed
 out, but numerous examples are given, which cannot fail to interest
 the reader, and prove a _very acceptable family directory_.—_Boston
 Traveler._

 It is exceedingly comprehensive, and well illustrated. It contains
 a great deal of information and sound advice, which every reader,
 whatever his views on medicine, would consider valuable.—_New York
 Courier._

 A complete encyclopædia of every disease to which the human family is
 heir, _with the cure for each disease_.—_Day Book._

 The Author has brought together a mass of information in reference
 to the human structure, its growth and its treatment, which will
 render his work of great use to readers _of all classes and
 conditions_.—_Philadelphia Daily Times._

Bound in heavy cloth, $3.00; library binding, $4.00. Agents wanted.
Address,

  FOWLER & WELLS CO., 775 Broadway, N. Y.


Brain and Mind,

OR, MENTAL SCIENCE CONSIDERED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE PRINCIPLES OF
PHRENOLOGY AND IN RELATION TO MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

By H. S. Drayton, A.M., M.D., and James McNeill, A.B. Illustrated with
over One Hundred Portraits and Diagrams. $1.50.


The authors state in their preface: “In preparing this volume it has
been the aim to meet an existing want, viz; that of a treatise which
not only gives the reader a complete view of the system of mental
science known as Phrenology, but also exhibits its relation to Anatomy
and Physiology, as those sciences are represented today by standard
authority.” [Illustration: Phrenological Head]

The following, from the Table of Contents, shows the scope and
character of the work:

  GENERAL PRINCIPLES.
  THE TEMPERAMENTS.
  STRUCTURE OF THE BRAIN AND SKULL.
  CLASSIFICATION OF THE FACULTIES.
  THE SELFISH ORGANS.
  THE INTELLECT.
  THE SEMI-INTELLECTUAL FACULTIES.
  THE ORGANS OF THE SOCIAL FUNCTIONS.
  THE SELFISH SENTIMENTS.
  THE MORAL AND RELIGIOUS SENTIMENTS.
  HOW TO EXAMINE HEADS.
  HOW CHARACTER IS MANIFESTED.
  THE ACTION OF THE FACULTIES.
  THE RELATION OF PHRENOLOGY TO METAPHYSICS AND EDUCATION.
  VALUE OF PHRENOLOGY AS AN ART.
  PHRENOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY.
  OBJECTIONS AND CONFIRMATIONS BY THE PHYSIOLOGISTS.
  PHRENOLOGY IN GENERAL LITERATURE.


Notices of the Press.

Phrenology is no longer a thing laughed at. The scientific researches
of the last twenty years have demonstrated the fearful and wonderful
complication of matter, not only with mind, but with what we call moral
qualities. Thereby, we believe, the divine origin of “our frame” has
been newly illustrated, and the Scriptural psychology confirmed: and
in the Phrenological Chart we are disposed to find a species of “urim
and thummim,” revealing, if not the Creator’s will concerning us, at
least His revelation of essential character. One thing is certain,
that the discoveries of physical science must ere long force all men
to the single alternative of Calvinism or Atheism. When they see that
God has written himself sovereign, absolute, and predestinating, on
the records of His creation, they will be ready to find His writing
as clearly in the Word; and the analogical argument, meeting the
difficulties and the objections on the side of Faith by those admitted
as existing on the side of Sight, will avail as well in one case as
in the other. We will only add, the above work is, without doubt, the
best popular presentation of the science which has yet been made. It
confines itself strictly to facts, and is not written in the interest
of any pet “theory.” It is made very interesting by its copious
illustrations, pictorial and narrative, and the whole is brought down
to the latest information on this curious and suggestive department of
knowledge.—_Christian Intelligencer._

As far as a comprehensive view of the teachings of Combe can be
embodied into a system that the popular mind can understand, this book
is as satisfactory an exposition of its kind as has yet been published.
The definitions are clear, exhaustive, and spirited.—_Philadelphia
Enquirer._


In style and treatment it is adapted to the general reader, abounds
with valuable instruction expressed in clear, practical terms, and the
work constitutes by far the best Text-book on Phrenology published, and
is adapted to both private and class study.

The illustrations of the Special Organs and Faculties are for the most
part from portraits of men and women whose characters are known, and
great pains have been taken to exemplify with accuracy the significance
of the text in each case. For the student of human nature and character
the work is of the highest value.

It is printed on fine paper, and substantially bound in extra cloth, by
mail, postpaid, on receipt of price, $1.50. Address

FOWLER & WELLS CO., Publishers, 775 Broadway, New York.


PHYSICAL CULTURE.


 For Home and School. Scientific and Practical. By D. L. Dowd,
 Professor of Physical Culture. 322 12mo. pages. 300 Illustrations.
 Fine Binding, Price $1.50.


CONTENTS.

 Physical Culture, Scientific and Practical, for the Home and School.
 Pure Air and Foul Air.

Questions Constantly Being Asked:

 No. 1. Does massage treatment strengthen muscular tissue?

 No. 2. Are boat-racing and horseback-riding good exercises?

 No. 3. Are athletic sports conducive to health?

 No. 4. Why do you object to developing with heavy weights?

 No. 5. How long a time will it take to reach the limit of development?

 No. 6. Is there a limit to muscular development, and is it possible to
 gain an abnormal development?

 No. 7. What is meant by being muscle bound?

 No. 8. Why are some small men stronger than others of nearly double
 their size?

 No. 9. Why is a person taller with less weight in the morning than in
 the evening?

 No. 10. How should a person breathe while racing or walking up-stairs
 or up-hill?

 No. 11. Is there any advantage gained by weighting the shoes of
 sprinters and horses?

 No. 12. What kind of food is best for us to eat?

 No. 13. What form of bathing is best?

 No. 14. How can I best reduce my weight, or how increase it?

 No. 15. Can you determine the size of one’s lungs by blowing in a
 spirometer?

 Personal Experience of the Author in Physical Training.

 Physical Culture for the Voice. Practice of Deep Breathing.

 Facial and Neck Development. A few Hints for the Complexion.

 The Graceful and Ungraceful Figure, and Improvement of Deformities,
 such as Bow-Leg, Knock-Knee, Wry-Neck, Round Shoulders, Lateral
 Curvature of the Spine, etc.

 A few Brief Rules. The Normal Man. Specific Exercises for the
 Development of Every Set of Muscles of the Body, Arms and Legs, also
 Exercises for Deepening and Broadening the Chest and Strengthening the
 Lungs.

 These 34 Specific Exercises are each illustrated by a full length
 figure (taken from life) showing the set of muscles in contraction,
 Which can be developed by each of them. Dumb Bell Exercises.

 Ten Appendices showing the relative gain of pupils from 9 years of age
 to 40.

 All who value Health, Strength and Happiness should procure and read
 this work; it will be found by far the best work ever written on this
 important subject. Sent by mail, postpaid, on receipt of price. $1.50.


Address, Fowler & Wells Co., Publishers, 775 Broadway, New York.


[Illustration: PORTRAITS FROM LIFE, IN “HEADS AND FACES.”]


HUMAN-NATURE.


If you want something to read that will interest you more thoroughly
than any book you have ever read, send for a copy of HEADS AND FACES,
a new Manual of Character Reading for the people. It will show you
how to read people as you would a book, and see if they are inclined
to be good, upright, honest, true, kind, charitable, loving, joyous,
happy and trustworthy people, such as you would like to know; or are
they by nature untrustworthy, treacherous and cruel, uncharitable and
hard-hearted, fault-finding, jealous, domineering people whom you would
not want to have intimate with yourselves or your families.

A knowledge of Human-Nature will enable you to judge of all this at
sight, and to choose for yourselves and children such companions as
will tend to make you and them better, purer, more noble and ambitious
to do and to be right, and would save many disappointments in social
and business relations. It will aid in choosing and governing servants,
training children, and deciding whom to trust in all the affairs of
life. If you would know people without waiting to become acquainted
with them, read HEAD AND FACES and How to Study Them, a new manual
of Character Reading, by Prof. Nelson Sizer, the Examiner in the
phrenological office of Fowler & Wells Co., New York, and H. S.
Drayton, M. D., Editor of the PHRENOLOGICAL JOURNAL. The authors know
what they are writing about, Prof. Sizer having devoted more than forty
years almost exclusively to the reading of character and he here lays
down the rules employed by him in his professional work.

The study of this subject is most fascinating, and you will certainly
be much interested in it. Send for this book, which is the most
comprehensive and popular work ever published for the price, 25,000
copies having been sold the first year. Contains 200 large octavo
pages, 250 Portraits and other Illustrations.

We will send it carefully by mail, postpaid, on receipt of price, only
40 cents in paper, or $1.00 in cloth binding. Address


Fowler & Wells Co., Publishers, 775 Broadway, New York.


GOOD HEALTH BOOKS.


 HEALTH IN THE HOUSEHOLD,

 Or, Hygienic Cookery. By Susanna W. Dodds, M.D. One large 12mo vol.
 600 pages, extra cloth or oil-cloth binding, price $2.00.

 Undoubtedly the very best work on the preparation of food in a
 healthful manner ever published, and one that should be in the hands
 of all who would furnish their tables with food that is wholesome and
 at the same time palatable, and will contribute much toward =Health in
 the Household=.


 THE NATURAL CURE,

 Of Consumption, Constipation, Bright’s Disease, Neuralgia, Rheumatism,
 “Colds” (Fevers), Etc. How Sickness Originates and How to Prevent it. A
 health Manual for the People. By C. E. Page. 278 pp., ex. cloth, $1.00.

 A new work with new ideas, both radical and reasonable, appealing
 to the common-sense of the reader. This is not a new work with
 old thoughts simply restated, but the most original Health Manual
 published in many years. It is written in the author’s clear,
 attractive manner, and should be in the hands of all who would either
 retain or regain their health, and keep from the hands of the doctors.


 HOUSEHOLD REMEDIES,

 For the Prevalent Disorders of the Human Organism, by Felix L. Oswald,
 M.D. 12mo, extra cloth, Price $1.00.

 The reader may be sure of this, he is no agent for a drug store.
 The doctor is a high apostle gospel of hygiene, and gives the mild
 blue pill and other alteratives fits at every opportunity, and often
 forces the opportunity to launch a broadside into the old favorite of
 the profession. Nature is a great healer and the great merit of the
 book is that it demands for nature and the human organization a fair
 show.—“McGregor News.”


 HOW TO BE WELL,

 Or, Common-Sense Medical Hygiene. A book for the people, giving
 directions for the treatment and cure of acute diseases without the
 use of drug medicines, also general hints on health. By M. Augusta
 Fairchild, M.D. 12mo, cloth, $1.00.

 We have here a new work on Hygiene containing the results of the
 author’s experience for many years in the treatment of acute and
 chronic diseases with Hygienic agencies, and it will save an
 incalculable amount of pain and suffering, as well as doctors’ bills,
 in every family where its simple directions are followed.


 DIGESTION and DYSPEPSIA,

 A Complete Explanation of the Digestive Processes, with the Symptoms
 and Treatment of Dyspepsia and other disorders of the Digestive
 Organs. Illustrated. By R. T. Trall, M.D. $1.00.

 The latest and best work on the subject. With fifty illustrations
 show1ng with all possible fullness every process of digestion, and
 giving all the causes, and directions for treatment of Dyspepsia.
 The author gives the summary of the data which he collected during
 an extensive practice of more than twenty-five years, largely with
 patients who were suffering from diseases caused by Dyspepsia and an
 impaired Digestion.


 THE MOTHER’S HYGIENIC HANDBOOK,

 for the Normal Development and Training of Women and Children, and
 the Treatment of their diseases with Hygienic agencies. By the same
 author. $1.00.

 The great experience and ability of the author enabled him to give
 just that advice which mothers need so often all through their lives.
 It covers the whole ground, and if it be carefully read, will go
 far towards giving us an “ENLIGHTENED MOTHERHOOD.” The work should
 be read by every wife and every woman who contemplates marriage.
 Mothers may place it in the hands of their daughters with words of
 commendation, and feel assured they will be the better prepared for
 the responsibilities and duties of married life and motherhood.


Sent by mail, post-paid, to any address on receipt of price. Agents
wanted. Address FOWLER & WELLS Co., Publishers, 775 Broadway, N. Y.


       *       *       *       *       *


Transcriber's Notes

Obvious typographical errors have been silently corrected. Variations
in hyphenation and all other spelling and punctuation remains unchanged.

Italics are represented thus _italic_ and bold thus =bold=.

On page 5
“Jesus Christ more than any other teacher or reformer reorganized”
reorganized has been replaced with recognized.








*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOOD AND MORALS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


